docs(how-to-guides): add a custom ROS message (#236)
autowarefoundation/autoware-documentation: docs/how-to-guides/add-a-custom-ros-message.md

# Add a custom ROS message

## Description

During the Autoware development, you will probably need to define your own messages, This page lists a simple example of adding a custom message to Autoware, For the general ROS2 tutorial see [Create custom msg and srv files](http://docs.ros.org/en/galactic/Tutorials/Beginner-Client-Libraries/Custom-ROS2-Interfaces.html).

## How to create custom message

Make sure you are in the Autoware workspace, and then run the following command to create a new package.

For example we create a package to define sensor messages.

1. Create a package

   ```console
   ros2 pkg create --build-type ament_cmake autoware_sensing_msgs
   ```

> 1. Create custom messages

Reviewer: Could you use the ordered style?
```suggestion
2. Create custom messages
```
Related: https://github.com/autowarefoundation/autoware/pull/3006

   You should create `.msg` files and place them in the `msg` directory.

   **NOTE**: The initial letters of the `.msg` and `.srv` files must be capitalized.

   For example we make msg files `GnssInsOrientation.msg` and `GnssInsOrientationStamped.msg` to define GNSS INS orientation messages:

   ```console
   mkdir msg
   cd msg
   touch GnssInsOrientation.msg
   touch GnssInsOrientationStamped.msg
   ```

   The `GnssInsOrientation.msg` with the following content:

   ```c++
   geometry_msgs/Quaternion orientation
   float32 rmse_rotation_x

>    float32 rmse_rotation_x
>    float32 rmse_rotation_x

Reviewer: Are these mistakes?

```suggestion
   float32 rmse_rotation_y
   float32 rmse_rotation_z
```

   ```

   In this case, the custom message uses a message from another message package `geometry_msgs/Quaternion`.

   The `GnssInsOrientationStamped.msg` with the following content:

   ```c++
   std_msgs/Header header
   GnssInsOrientation orientation
   ```

   In this case, the custom message uses a message from another message package `std_msgs/Header`.

1. CmakeList.txt

   In order to use this custom message in `C++` or `Python` languages, we need add the following lines to `CmakeList.txt`:

   ```cmake

>    set(msg_files
>    "msg/GnssInsOrientation.msg"
>    "msg/GnssInsOrientationStamped.msg")
>    set(msg_dependencies
>    geometry_msgs
>    std_msgs)
>    rosidl_generate_interfaces(${PROJECT_NAME}
>    ${msg_files}
>    DEPENDENCIES ${msg_dependencies}
>    ADD_LINTER_TESTS)

Reviewer: Please format the code.
And how about removing temporary variables?

```suggestion
   rosidl_generate_interfaces(${PROJECT_NAME}
     "msg/GnssInsOrientation.msg"
     "msg/GnssInsOrientationStamped.msg"
     DEPENDENCIES
       geometry_msgs
       std_msgs
     ADD_LINTER_TESTS
   )
```

   ```

1. package.xml

   We need to declare relevant dependencies in `package.xml`. For the above example we need to add the following content:

   ```xml

>    <depend>geometry_msgs</depend>
>    <depend>std_msgs</depend>
>    <buildtool_depend>rosidl_default_generators</buildtool_depend>
>    <exec_depend>rosidl_default_runtime</exec_depend>
>    <member_of_group>rosidl_interface_packages</member_of_group>

Reviewer: How about this? To be consistent with the existing packages.

```suggestion
  <buildtool_depend>ament_cmake_auto</buildtool_depend>
  <buildtool_depend>rosidl_default_generators</buildtool_depend>

  <depend>geometry_msgs</depend>
  <depend>std_msgs</depend>

  <exec_depend>rosidl_default_runtime</exec_depend>

  <test_depend>ament_lint_auto</test_depend>
  <test_depend>ament_lint_common</test_depend>

  <member_of_group>rosidl_interface_packages</member_of_group>
```

Author: delete:
```xml
<buildtool_depend>ament_cmake_auto</buildtool_depend>
<test_depend>ament_lint_auto</test_depend>
 <test_depend>ament_lint_common</test_depend>
```
Thanks for your suggestion, but I think this tutorial should only cover the dependencies needed for custom messages and not focus on the basic dependencies needed for ROS packages.

Reviewer: It's okay, but I believe those messages should almost always be added.
I'll leave it to you.

Author: Good idea, `ament_cmake _auto` is a great tool, I will replace `ament_cmake` with `ament_cmake_auto` in `package.xml` and `CmakeLists.txt`.

# Add a custom ROS message

## Description

During the autoware development, you will probably need to define your own messages, The page only list a simple example of add a custom message to autoware, for basic tutorial see [Create custom msg and srv files](http://docs.ros.org/en/galactic/Tutorials/Beginner-Client-Libraries/Custom-ROS2-Interfaces.html).

## How to create custom message

Make sure you are in the autoware workspace, and then run the following command to create a new pakage.

For example we create a package to define sensor message.

1. Create a package

   ```console
   ros2 pkg create --build-type ament_cmake autoware_sensing_msgs
   ```

1. Create custom message

>    You should create `.msg` file and placed it in `msg` derectory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   You should create `.msg` files and place them in the `msg` directory.
```

   **NOTE**: The initial letters of the `.msg` and `.srv` files must be capitalized.

>    For example we make msg files `GnssInsOrientation.msg` and `GnssInsOrientationStamped.msg` to define GNSS INS orientation message:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   For example we make msg files `GnssInsOrientation.msg` and `GnssInsOrientationStamped.msg` to define GNSS INS orientation messages:
```

   ```console
   mkdir msg
   cd msg
   touch GnssInsOrientation.msg
   touch GnssInsOrientationStamped.msg
   ```

   The `GnssInsOrientation.msg` with the following content:

   ```c++
   geometry_msgs/Quaternion orientation
   float32 rmse_rotation_x
   float32 rmse_rotation_x
   float32 rmse_rotation_x
   ```

   In this case, the custom message uses a message from another message package `geometry_msgs/Quaternion`.

   The `GnssInsOrientationStamped.msg` with the following content:

   ```c++
   std_msgs/Header header
   GnssInsOrientation orientation
   ```

   In this case, the custom message uses a message from another message package `std_msgs/Header`.

1. CmakeList.txt

   In order to use this custom message in `C++` or `Python` languages, we need add the following lines to `CmakeList.txt`:

   ```cmake
   set(msg_files
   "msg/GnssInsOrientation.msg"
   "msg/GnssInsOrientationStamped.msg")
   set(msg_dependencies
   geometry_msgs
   std_msgs)
   rosidl_generate_interfaces(${PROJECT_NAME}
   ${msg_files}
   DEPENDENCIES ${msg_dependencies}
   ADD_LINTER_TESTS)
   ```

1. package.xml

>    We need to declare a relevant dependencies in `package.xml`. In up example we need add following contents:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   We need to declare relevant dependencies in `package.xml`. For the above example we need to add the following content:
```

   ```xml
   <depend>geometry_msgs</depend>
   <depend>std_msgs</depend>
   <buildtool_depend>rosidl_default_generators</buildtool_depend>
   <exec_depend>rosidl_default_runtime</exec_depend>
   <member_of_group>rosidl_interface_packages</member_of_group>
   ```

1. Build the custom message package

>    You can build the package in the root of workspace, for example run the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   You can build the package in the root of your workspace, for example by running the following command:
```

   ```console
   colcon build --packages-select autoware_sensing_msgs
   ```

>    Now the GnssInsOrientationStamped message will be discoverable by other packages in autoware.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Now the GnssInsOrientationStamped message will be discoverable by other packages in Autoware.
```

## How to use custom message in autoware

> You can use the custom messages in autoware by following steps:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use the custom messages in Autoware by following these steps:
```

> - add dependency in `package.xml`
> - include the `.hpp` file of the relevant message in the code.
> 
> For up example:
> 
> We should add following contents in the `package.xml`:
> 
> ```xml
> <depend>autoware_sensing_msgs</depend>
> ```
> 
> we should add following contents in the code:
> 
> ```c++
> #include <autoware_sensing_msgs/msg/gnss_ins_orientation_stamped.hpp>
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- add dependency in `package.xml`
   - E.g., `<depend>autoware_sensing_msgs</depend>`.
- include the `.hpp` file of the relevant message in the code.
   - E.g., `#include <autoware_sensing_msgs/msg/gnss_ins_orientation_stamped.hpp>`.
```

# Add a custom ROS message

## Overview

During the Autoware development, you will probably need to define your own messages, please read the following instructions before add a custom message.

1. Message in [autoware_msgs](https://github.com/autowarefoundation/autoware_msgs) will define `Core` interface for module

   - key messages defined under `Design/Interface` section
   - If a contributor wishes to make changes or add new message for `core` interface, they should create a new discussion post under `design` category.

> 2. Any other "minor" message used for internal communication within module(e.g., planning) should be defined in another repository(e.g., under autoware.universe repository or contributor's own repository)

Reviewer: [style]
- https://developers.google.com/style/word-list
- Added clearer example.

```suggestion
2. Any other minor or proposal messages used for internal communication within a component (such as planning) should be defined in another repository.
  - https://github.com/tier4/tier4_autoware_msgs is an example of that.
```

> The following is a simple tutorial of adding a `autoware_msgs` to Autoware, for the general ROS2 tutorial see [Create custom msg and srv files](http://docs.ros.org/en/galactic/Tutorials/Beginner-Client-Libraries/Custom-ROS2-Interfaces.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following is a simple tutorial of adding a message package to `autoware_msgs`.
For the general ROS 2 tutorial, see [Create custom msg and srv files](http://docs.ros.org/en/humble/Tutorials/Beginner-Client-Libraries/Custom-ROS2-Interfaces.html).
```

## How to create custom message

Make sure you are in the Autoware workspace, and then run the following command to create a new package.

> For example we create a package to define sensor messages.

Reviewer: Is this more natural?

```suggestion
As an example, let's create a package to define sensor messages.
```

1. Create a package

   ```console
   cd ./src/core/autoware_msgs
   ros2 pkg create --build-type ament_cmake autoware_sensing_msgs
   ```

2. Create custom messages

   You should create `.msg` files and place them in the `msg` directory.

   **NOTE**: The initial letters of the `.msg` and `.srv` files must be capitalized.

>    For example we make msg files `GnssInsOrientation.msg` and `GnssInsOrientationStamped.msg` to define GNSS INS orientation messages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   As an example, let's make `.msg` files `GnssInsOrientation.msg` and `GnssInsOrientationStamped.msg` to define GNSS/INS orientation messages:
```

   ```console
   mkdir msg
   cd msg
   touch GnssInsOrientation.msg
   touch GnssInsOrientationStamped.msg
   ```

>    The `GnssInsOrientation.msg` with the following content:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Edit `GnssInsOrientation.msg` with your editor to be the following content:
```

   ```c++
   geometry_msgs/Quaternion orientation
   float32 rmse_rotation_x
   float32 rmse_rotation_y
   float32 rmse_rotation_z
   ```

   In this case, the custom message uses a message from another message package `geometry_msgs/Quaternion`.

>    The `GnssInsOrientationStamped.msg` with the following content:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Edit `GnssInsOrientationStamped.msg` with your editor to be the following content:
```

   ```c++
   std_msgs/Header header
   GnssInsOrientation orientation
   ```

   In this case, the custom message uses a message from another message package `std_msgs/Header`.

> 3. CmakeLists.txt

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Edit CMakeLists.txt
```

>    In order to use this custom message in `C++` or `Python` languages, we need add the following lines to `CmakeList.txt`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   In order to use this custom message in `C++` or `Python` languages, we need to add the following lines to `CMakeList.txt`:
```

   ```cmake
   rosidl_generate_interfaces(${PROJECT_NAME}
     "msg/GnssInsOrientation.msg"
     "msg/GnssInsOrientationStamped.msg"
     DEPENDENCIES
       geometry_msgs
       std_msgs
     ADD_LINTER_TESTS
   )
   ```

   :speech_balloon: The `ament_cmake_auto` tool is very useful and is more widely used in Autoware, so we recommend using `ament_cmake_auto` instead of `ament_cmake`.

   We need to replace

   ```cmake
   find_package(ament_cmake REQUIRED)

   ament_package()
   ```

   with

   ```cmake
   find_package(ament_cmake_auto REQUIRED)

   ament_auto_package()
   ```

> 4. package.xml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Edit package.xml
```

   We need to declare relevant dependencies in `package.xml`. For the above example we need to add the following content:

   ```xml

>    <depend>geometry_msgs</depend>
>    <depend>std_msgs</depend>
>    <buildtool_depend>rosidl_default_generators</buildtool_depend>
>    <exec_depend>rosidl_default_runtime</exec_depend>
>    <member_of_group>rosidl_interface_packages</member_of_group>

Reviewer: To keep consistent style, it might be better to sort lines by the order written in http://download.ros.org/schema/package_format3.xsd.
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/31987104/208952065-3e600e6a-e97c-475c-b675-8f26231d8422.png)

```suggestion
   <buildtool_depend>rosidl_default_generators</buildtool_depend>
   
   <exec_depend>rosidl_default_runtime</exec_depend>

   <depend>geometry_msgs</depend>
   <depend>std_msgs</depend>

   <member_of_group>rosidl_interface_packages</member_of_group>
```

   ```

>    We need to replace `<buildtool_depend>ament_cmake</buildtool_depend>` with `<buildtool_depend>ament_cmake_auto</buildtool_depend>` in the package.xml file.

Reviewer: [nits]

```suggestion
   We need to replace `<buildtool_depend>ament_cmake</buildtool_depend>` with `<buildtool_depend>ament_cmake_auto</buildtool_depend>` in the `package.xml` file.
```

5. Build the custom message package

   You can build the package in the root of your workspace, for example by running the following command:

   ```console
   colcon build --packages-select autoware_sensing_msgs
   ```

   Now the `GnssInsOrientationStamped` message will be discoverable by other packages in Autoware.

> ## How to use custom message in Autoware

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How to use custom messages in Autoware
```

You can use the custom messages in Autoware by following these steps:

> - add dependency in `package.xml`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add dependencies in `package.xml`.
```

>   - E.g., `<depend>autoware_sensing_msgs</depend>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - For example, `<depend>autoware_sensing_msgs</depend>`.
```

> - include the `.hpp` file of the relevant message in the code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Include the `.hpp` file of the relevant message in the code.
```

>   - E.g., `#include <autoware_sensing_msgs/msg/gnss_ins_orientation_stamped.hpp>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - For example, `#include <autoware_sensing_msgs/msg/gnss_ins_orientation_stamped.hpp>`.
```
